###How To Create A Django Project In Anaconda? ###
Here are the steps that you need to follow to create a Django project in anaconda:

1. Create a new environment

First of all, you need to create a separate environment for Django development.  
By default, anaconda comes up with the base environment. But creating a separate environment will be helpful to manage the projects without any package dependency confliction.   
So, let’s create a separate environment specifically for web development projects using the Django framework.  
Open your CMD or Anaconda Prompt and create a separate environment called djangoenv by typing in the following command.

$ conda create -n djangoenv python=3.6 anaconda    

I just mentioned the version of Python that I’m using as Python 3.6. If you want to use other versions of Python, you can do so.  
The previous command may take some time to finish its execution. Once it is done, let’s go to the next step.
2. Activate the new environment
Activate the newly created environment by typing in the following command.

$ conda activate djangoenv

Now, we are inside the newly created environment. But our environment does not have Django in it. So, let’s install it.

3. Install Django in the new environment
Let’s install Django in the new environment using the following command. 

$ conda install -c anaconda django 

Wait till the installation completes. It may take some time to finish. That’s it. Now you can create Django projects in this separate environment.  
Let’s try to create a sample project to check whether everything is ready. Let’s do this using the following commands.  

4. Create a new Django project
First of all, let’s start a new project called website.

$ django-admin startproject website 

5. Create a Django App
A project can have multiple applications. Let’s create our first application.
Move Into the Project Folder using $ cd <PROJECT_NAME>.

$ cd first_django_app

To create the app, we are going to use the manage.py file configurations in this format $ python manage.py startapp <APP_NAME>.

$ python manage.py startapp django_app

This operation created the django_app folder inside the first_django_app directory.

6. Run the Django server
Now, navigate to the project folder by using the cd command. Let’s run the project and see whether everything is working fine or not.

$ python manage.py runserver 

If you are on a Mac or Linux, use python3 manage.py runserver instead of the command given above.  
Once you’ve done that, a URL will be generated on the command line. Now, copy the URL that is generated and paste it on a new tab in your browser.  
That’s it. Everything is set up nicely if you can see this rocket launching up towards the sky.  
Django project in anaconda
Your Django environment is ready. After this, you can open Command Prompt or Anaconda Prompt whenever needed, and start doing the project just by activating the environment for Django.  
The following command is used whenever we need to activate the Django environment.

$ conda activate djangoenv 

Do these steps and create stunning projects using your favorite backend web framework “Django”, without changing your Anaconda setup.  